# philosophy

The purpose of the `ikkono` protocol is to *allow* interoperability based on strong cryptographic proofs between independently controlled identities and servers, but never to mandate participation or interaction between parties.

Ethical questions of data custody, privacy, freedom of movement, etc. are all interesting and relevant, but are not addressed by the `ikkono` protocol itself. The philosophy of `ikkono`'s authors is that such questions must be dealt with and addressed in the places and manners in which such questions have always been addressed, not by the authors of this mechanical and practical protocol. 

Further, the authors of the protocol assert that trying to influence such debates by inserting ethical constraints in the substance of the protocol causes double harm:
- It reduces the value of the protocol by including mechanically irrelevant concerns
- It usurps the decision making power about ethical matters from the groups that would otherwise deliberate and decide on them

## Freedom of participation

`ikkono` does not and shall never be modified to demand that any identity, server, or other participant interact with or respond to any other participant.

`ikkono` specifies the mechanics and formats of how interactions should proceed, so that *if* parties choose to interact, they have a reliable means of understanding each other.

## Freedom of ethics

`ikkono` does not and shall never be modified to demand standards of behavior, trust, or other ethical requirements as conditions of being considered a conforming implementation. 

### Irrelevance to proof of claims
`ikkono`'s mechanics are designed to be mathematically sufficient to prove any claims asserted, so that the intentions of any participant are irrelevant. 

### Example

 - Palm Identity Services requires that any identities it hosts must be generated by Palm, or by another service that Palm trusts. This ensures that users cannot maliciously use another entity's XID to create a confusing or ambiguous identity. Note that such an identity would still be unable to validate itself as the original entity without access to the original entity's private key(s), but it is confusing nonetheless, and so Palm participates in a mutual trust network that requires all entity XIDs to be generated by servers.
 - Berta has just enrolled in a college that requires an identity hosted by the network in which Palm participates
 - Palm offers free identity hosting, and Berta generates an identity on Palm, which she then uses to obtain a passport to her college
 - By design, Berta continues to use this same identity for a number of years, obtaining passports from various organizations and employers that all reference the same underlying identity, which continues to be hosted by Palm
 - Some of Berta's passport authorities have sold data about Berta to Palm and others, so that Palm becomes aware of the high value of Berta's ability to prove her identity. Palm begins demanding that Berta pay large monthly fees to continue hosting her identity.
 - Berta never downloaded her private key(s) in the past, and now demands that Palm provide them so that she can move her identity to be hosted elsewhere
 - Palm refuses unless Berta pays an enormous "termination fee"

In this example, Palm is behaving in a way that is economically rational, but also in a way that many people would regard as repugnant and abusive. Such behavior is explicitly *allowed* by the protocol, since the bedrock philosophy is that any participant is free to interact or not with any other participant. Palm chooses to cease interacting with Berta, even to provide a copy of her "own" private key, unless she pays up.  

The protocol does prohibit servers from preventing actors from proving ownership of their identities, but only in the cryptographic sense. Mathematically, *if* Berta had her private key then she could prove her own identity without Palm. Data exists in the universe, and has always existed since Berta's identity was created, such that "her" identity can be proven by any party with access to her private key. Sadly for her, she continued to trust Palm in the human sense without ever getting custody of that critical piece of data.
