Summary of thoughts 2021-06-29

- Talking and whiteboarding helped organize and clarify some thoughts 

# ikkono

The ikkono standard has two parts
 - **ontology** for **describing** identity and access management (IAM)
 - **protocol** for a provable series of statements (a Merkle tree) that justifies any decision to grant or deny access

## Out of scope
### privacy, secrecy
Privacy and secrecy are **out of scope** for ikkono itself. ikkono does not describe a method of actually protecting resources. Its purpose is to describe and validate statements and decisions about authentication and authorization.

### Authentication apart from cryptographic signatures
The only authentication type that the ikkono protocol *implements* is signing with asymmetric cryptographic keys, as this is the only mechanism that can be proved in a trust-free environment.

Any other authentication mechanisms -- passwords, TOTP, biometrics, etc. -- require outside actions or devices. Participants in an ikkono network can state that they want these things done, state that they did them, or state that they trust another actor to do them, but the protocol itself cannot actually prove that the authentication was done.

ikkono-compatible products will definitely implement other authentication mechanisms. Even in a situation where all actors fully support cryptographic signing, there will need to be independent mechanisms to resolve situations where keys have been compromised or lost.

## ontology

The ikkono ontology in turn consists of two main portions

 - A description of the **statements** which parties make to define principals and create access rules
 - A description of the current **state** of the access rules, including the principals, roles, resources, privileges, etc.
 - The **state** is by definition derived from the statements. No state can exist except by modification or creation in a statement.
 - Asking "can X do Y"? Is a query of state. Asking "why can X do Y?" is a query of statements
 - The statements constitute a single, immutable graph (but with many independent branches)
 - The state constitutes a traditional data store well suited for encoding as a relational database

### state

#### *Description of resources*
  - domain
  - entity

#### *Description of access*
  - ledger
  - scope
  - actor
  - authority
  - role
  - privilege
  - group
  - passport
  - resource

### statements
  - key
  - document
  - warrant
  - grant

## statement types

### establishment warrant

`ESTABLISH-( ACTOR | AUTHORITY )`

Declares the existence of a new actor or authority, and declares how they may be authenticated. Must include at least one public key.

### attribution warrant

`ATTRIBUTE-( ACTOR | AUTHORITY )`

Describes how a principal may be authenticated, in addition to or instead of their initial public key.

### assignment warrant

`ASSIGN-ACTOR`

Identifies one or more actors that may act on behalf of the issuing principal.

### passport

`ISSUE-PASSPORT`

Formally recognizes an actor with respect to one or more domains owned by an authority, enabling authorization grants to be assigned. Passports can be revoked at any time at the sole discretion of the issuing authority.

### association warrant

`ASSOCIATE-( PASSPORT | GROUP | RESOURCE | SCOPE )`

Adds a passport or group as a member of a group

### declaration

`DECLARE-( LEDGER | DOMAIN | ROLE | PRIVILEGE | GROUP | ENTITY | RESOURCE | SCOPE )`

Declares the existence of a domain or ledger or label within a domain or ledger

### recognition warrant ????

`RECOGNIZE-( ACTOR | AUTHORITY )`

Formally recognizes, or *imports* a principal into an authority's ledger. May also assign a local identifier to the actor or authority. (cref "Bob's Alice" in SDSI spec c.1995). This does not grant a passport, it merely records the *existence* of the principal so it can be referred to within the ledger.

### reference

`REFERENCE`

*imports* a declaration from a different ledger or domain

### grant

`GRANT`

Assigns a role or privilege to a passport or group, optionally identifying any or all of the following additional parameters
 - A target **resource** as a scope
 - Constraints

### termination

`DELETE | REVOKE | CANCEL`

Terminates the existence or validity of a warrant, passport, declaration, reference, or grant

- SCOPES are nested collections     of RESOURCES
- GROUPS are nested collections     of ACTORS
- ROLES  are non-nested collections of PRIVILEGES

Free space - TOP-LEVEL-EXISTENCE
- establishment warrant
- attribution warrant
- assignment warrant
- declare ledger
- declare domain

Domain space - Application (domain)-specific METADATA
- (declare | obsolete | delete) entity
- (declare | obsolete | delete) privilege

Ledger space - IAM DATABASE
- reference domain
- role ??
- (issue | revoke) passport
- (declare | delete) group
- (declare | delete) scope
- (declare | delete) resource
- [cancel] grant
